Welcome to this section on adjusting the attention activations.
Remember that the attention block comprises individual heads, like a few dozen heads, and their goal
is to incorporate the context of the preceding tokens into the currently processed tokens, so that
the token embeddings vector can be tugged in a way that facilitates an appropriate and relevant prediction
about the next token.
For that reason, experiments involving causal interventions with attention heads are generally focused
on understanding how those interventions impact the ways that the model incorporates context into token
embeddings, vectors, and ultimately next token predictions.
For example, in this, in the following videos you will learn how to isolate and manipulate individual
heads in a transformer block.
We will replace each head at a time with either zeros or the average of the within head activations.
And to access each individual head, I will show you a different hook implanting function so that we
can get the individual attention heads before they are mixed together by the zero linear mixing matrix.
And then we will measure the impact in a few different ways.
So this video here is a code demo in which I will set up the basic design of the experiment.
And then the next video will be a code challenge, where you will expand on this code and do more detailed
investigations.
Anyway, I will start with an overview of the demo and then I'll switch to code.
I will work with GPT two small in this demo.
I do not actually want to change the individual q or k vectors.
Instead, I want to change the attention heads after their adjustments have been calculated.
Therefore, I'm going to hook into this C proj layer.
Now the problem with hooking into this layer is that this is the projection from the attention algorithm,
which means that all of the 12 attention heads have been linearly mixed at the output of c proj.
Remember that you have 12 heads.
They all do their own thing on their own, and then they get concatenated and then multiplied by the
w0 mixing matrix.
So what we want to do here is access the concatenated attention heads before they get linearly mixed.
So we do not want to hook into the output of this layer here.
Instead we want to intercept the input and change the values of the input into C proj before it gets
linearly mixed through multiplication with the w0 matrix.
And to do that, I'm going to use a slightly different register function.
This one is called a forward pre-hook.
You can see that here.
So far we've just been using forward hooks and now I have forward pre-hook.
And so inside this function, which by the way only has an input input and no output as an input, I
can access the input to this layer and then pass on the input into the rest of the layer.
So yeah, this is the input into the C proj layer.
And what I've returned from this function is the input that gets processed in this same layer.
So inside this function I reshape the matrix so that I have an extra dimension for heads.
And then from that tensor, I pick out one of those heads to replace with zeros.
So this is all of the tokens, all the sequences in the batch, all the tokens.
Just one head over here.
And then this final dimension here corresponds to the dimensionality of the heads.
That's not the same as the dimensionality of the embeddings vectors.
So that was this dimension.
Here is 64 for GPT two small.
And then I reshape it back.
And then here I send it back out to be processed with the rest of the C proj layer, which basically
just means multiplying by the w0 mixing matrix.
Now if this were happening during training, there would also be dropout applied.
But of course that doesn't happen here because we've switched the model into eval mode.
Now the last thing that's happening inside this hook function is that I have this if statement in here
where I will only actually do any of this stuff here if the variable had to.
Ablate is an integer between one and the number of heads minus one.
And the reason why I do this is so that I can set this variable here to be, for example, 1000.
And then this function is still hooked into the model.
It still gets called, but it doesn't do anything other than take up like a nanosecond of computation
time to determine that this statement is false.
Okay, so that's the hook function to test the impact of zeroing out a head.
I'm going to use some text that is often used for these kinds of investigations.
The idea is to present a sentence that is missing a final word, which can only be accurately guessed
with context, and also with world knowledge.
So here is the sentence Berlin is the capital of.
That's the end of the text that I tokenized and gave to the model.
So what is the most appropriate following token?
Of course you know the answer is Germany.
So now the idea is I feed those tokens into the model and get the logit outputs for the final token
of the model, and check the logit outputs for the word Germany.
And then we can compare those logits after manipulating the heads after zeroing out some of the heads.
And as a reference, we can also look at the activation for the token France.
That is an interesting comparison token because it is semantically related to the word Germany, but
it is incorrect in this sentence.
So before running any manipulations, any zeroing out of attention heads, I just ran through the forward
pass on a clean version of the model, so not manipulating anything.
Here you see the log softmax outputs of the model of the final token.
The.
The largest softmax value was for the token Germany, which is the correct answer.
And the token for France was actually pretty high up on the log softmax scale.
So that's pretty interesting, because it means that this semantically related word was still pretty
strongly activated, even though it is the incorrect answer here.
Okay, so this green square up here, this is our reference value.
Then I'm going to do a forward pass with exactly the same tokens and extract exactly the same value.
12 times once zeroing out each attention head from layer five.
So I'm just manipulating layer five transformer block five here.
And that's what you see here.
So the x axis shows the attention.
Heads from one layer and the y axis shows the difference in the logsoftmax for each of these runs,
compared to the clean reference value, without any manipulations.
So some were larger, some were smaller, but the aggregate is a suppression.
And this means that the model actually produced a lower logsoftmax for the word Germany, after I ablated
the attention heads in this one layer.
Also interesting to note that the logits for uh, for the word France seemed to increase relative to
its clean version.
Now, this is an interesting set of observations from exactly one sample and one layer, so we shouldn't
overinterpret this pattern.
However, it is interesting to see that the correct answer went down, while the incorrect answer,
but semantically related actually went up.
So it kind of seems like we've added some noise that just impaired the model's ability to correctly
use context from previous tokens to generate an appropriate subsequent token.
That said, the logit output for the word Berlin was still the maximum for each of 12 of these iterations
in the experiment.
So the model was still categorically correct, even though the manipulation did have a noticeable impact.
Well, I have more things to say about this code and this experiment, and I'll do that when I walk
you through the actual code file.
Import some libraries, import the model, switch it to eval mode as I always do here I'm just defining
some useful variables.
So the number of heads, the number of embeddings dimensions and the dimensionality of the individual
heads.
So remember that the dimensionality of the heads corresponds to the token embeddings dimension divided
by the number of heads.
So we know that in GPT two small, the embeddings dimensionality is 768 and the number of heads is 12.
And so this ratio here gives us exactly the number 64.
Okay.
Very good.
So here is the hook function that I showed in the slides.
But I will walk through it again.
So the idea is that we will implant this into the C proj layer.
And again the C proj layer.
You see that here.
So h for hidden the each of the transformer blocks.
Here is the attention sub block.
And we have c attention where the q and k and v vectors are calculated.
And then we have c proj and the input into c proj is the output of the softmax attention algorithm with
the mask and the QQ transpose and all that good stuff.
That's the input into C proj.
And then this layer takes that input, which is all of the the 12 attention heads concatenated next
to each other and then multiplies that pulse multiplies by w0 which mixes all the information from all
the heads together.
So that means that coming into C proj, we can separate the matrix into the separate heads.
But coming out of C proj, we can no longer isolate the individual heads, because the individual heads
no longer exist at the output of C proj.
They've all been mixed together.
Okay, so and that means we do not want to hook the output of C proj.
We want to hook the input into C proj.
And that is what I do here.
So register forward.
Again this is the code function that you have seen a bajillion times so far.
And what's new here is this pre-hook.
This means that instead of being able to return the output and replace the output, instead, we grab
the input and we replace the input.
Okay, so.
And what do we do when we get inside of this C proj layer.
So I take the input into the C proj layer.
I reshape it to the number of batches or actually the number of sequences in a batch, the number of
tokens in the sequence, the number of heads and the head dimensionality.
And remember the product of these two.
You don't even need to believe me.
We can just.
Let's see.
Here it is 12 and 64 and we multiply them together to get the embeddings dimensionality.
So this gives us a matrix where we can easily index individual heads.
Technically you do not need to reshape.
You can also do indexing just by adding, you know, a multiple of the number of heads.
But I think this is easier.
Okay.
So now I have this variable here and I'm going to replace with zeros just one head.
All of the sequences in the batch, all of the tokens uh, just one head and all of the head dimensions.
Now uh, in this video I'm only going to replace all of the tokens in the code challenge.
In the next video, you're also going to explore what happens when you just modify only a single token,
the very last token.
But we're not going to do that now okay.
And then yeah just printing out some useful information, reshaping it back and then, uh, providing
this back as an output of the hook function, which means this is the new overwritten input into C,
okay.
And then again I have this if statement here.
And that's so that if I do not want to manipulate any of the heads.
I can set this value to be a billion and this statement will be false.
And then none of this code will run.
All right.
I hope that all makes sense.
Here is the sentence.
So Berlin is the capital of blank.
We want to see what the model is going to choose.
Okay.
So then this is just confirming that these are single token words, which is just going to make it easier
for us to analyze the data.
Also, don't forget that there is this space in front of these words.
I'm actually going to get back to that later.
Okay.
So now, uh, yeah.
Here I'm setting the head to ablate to be some ludicrously high number.
The reason why I'm doing that is this run here.
I want to see what a clean model produces without any manipulations.
Okay.
You could also run this through before defining the hook.
So that's also a possibility.
Okay.
Yeah.
This is what I showed before.
Basically this tells us that the model really does believe.
The model understands that Germany is the Berlin is the capital of Germany.
And so the next token after the word of should be the token for Germany.
Okay, great.
So now we are going to do the experiment.
I'm looping over all of the heads, doing a forward pass.
And at each iteration of this forward pass, this is the variable that will change in the global workspace.
And so therefore it also changes inside the function okay.
And then yeah Logsoftmax.
And this is exactly the same code as above.
So I'm just getting the uh target for space Germany.
This is the logsoftmax value for space France.
And then here I'm taking the largest, uh index.
So this is going to tell me which token the model actually predicted would be next.
And here, you see, is this little friendly message that I've printed out doubt inside the hook function.
That's just a confirmation that it's really doing what I want it to do.
This is not the sort of print statement that you would leave in.
Normally, when you're doing research and running this over like hundreds or thousands of different
versions of the text.
Anyway, so here we can create this plot that you saw in the slides.
Again, the idea is that by manipulating one head.
So we zeroed out one individual head and now the logsoftmax goes down.
This is not a huge decrease, but it is consistent across the different heads.
Mostly consistent.
So that's pretty interesting.
And yeah you also see this increase for the non-target words.
Shouldn't really overinterpret all of this from one analysis with one sentence, but it does suggest
that, you know, there's kind of shift in the balance that other words are getting relatively more
active and the target word is getting relatively less active.
Okay, so all of that said, we can see that the predicted token will still Germany all the way through,
even though we do get this change.
So Germany is still the top token for this sentence, even though we did make these minor modifications
to the attention heads in this one layer.
Something I'd like to stress here is that the categorical output of a language model, that is the token
that it actually generates, that is the most relevant outcome for AI safety.
That is to say, if you are really interested in helping, make sure that AI is safe and fair and minimally
biased, then a bunch of weird, complicated analyses on the internal activation dynamics might seem
like they don't really matter that much.
Which you really care about is the model's actual token outputs.
That said, only looking at categorical accuracy might be too coarse of a dependent variable.
More sensitive and continuous numerical measurements might be more insightful, especially considering
that very small shifts in the model can have a big impact at a large scale, even if they are not necessarily
easily observable in single token generation.
The last thing I'll say here is about the discussion of what value to impute.
If you are replacing the values naturally calculated by the model with some other values.
What do you actually replace them with?
Zeros or the mean of the activations or the median?
That's really not an easy question to answer.
And that's actually one of the investigations that you will do in the code challenge in the next video.